my fellow Americans this is the 34th
time I'll speak to you from the Oval
Office and the last we've been together
eight years now and soon it'll be time
for me to go but before I do I wanted to
share some thoughts some of which I've
been saving for a long time it's been
the honor of my life to be your
president so many of you have written
the past few weeks to say thanks but I
could say as much to you Nancy and I are
grateful for the opportunity you gave us
to serve one of the things about the
presidency is that you're always
somewhat apart
you spend a lot of time going by too
fast in a car someone else is driving
and seeing the people through tinted
glass the parents holding up a child and
the wave you saw too late and couldn't
return and so many times I wanted to
stop and reach out from behind the glass
and connect well maybe I can do a little
of that tonight people ask how I feel
about leaving and the fact is parting is
such sweet sorrow the sweet part is
California and the ranch and freedom the
sorrow the goodbyes of course and
leaving this beautiful place you know
down the hall and up the stairs from
this office is the part of the White
House where the president and his family
live there are a few favorite windows I
have up there that I like to stand and
look out of early in the morning the
view is over the grounds here to the
Washington Monument and then the mall
and the Jefferson Memorial but on
mornings when the humidity is low you
can see past the Jefferson to the river
the Potomac and the Virginia Shore
someone said that's the view Lincoln had
when he saw the smoke rising from the
Battle of Bull Run but I see more
prosaic things the grass on the banks
the morning traffic as people make their
way to work now and then a sailboat on
the river I've been thinking a bit at
that window I've been reflecting on what
the past eight years have meant and mean
and the image that comes to mind like a
refrain is a nautical one a small story
about a big ship at a refugee and a
sailor it was back in the early 80s at
the height of the boat people
and the Sailor was hard at work on the
carrier Midway which was patrolling the
South China Sea the Sailor like most
American servicemen was young smart and
fiercely observant the crew spied on the
horizon a leaky little boat and crammed
inside were refugees from Indochina
hoping to get to America the Midway sent
a small launch to bring them to the ship
and safety
if the refugees made their way through
the choppy seas one spied the Sailor on
deck and stood up and called out to him
he yelled hello American sailor hello
freedom man a small moment with a big
meaning a moment the Sailor who wrote it
in a letter couldn't get out of his mind
and when I saw it neither could I
because that's what it has to it was to
be an American in the end 1980s we stood
again for freedom I know we always have
but in the past few years the world
again and in a way we ourselves
rediscovered it it's been quite a
journey this decade and we held together
through some stormy seas and at the end
together we're reaching our destination
the fact is from Grenada to the
Washington and Moscow summits from the
recession of 81 to 82 to the expansion
that began in late 82 and continues to
this day we've made a difference the way
I see it there were two great triumphs
two things that I'm proudest of one is
the economic recovery in which the
people of America created and filled 19
million new jobs the other is the
recovery of our morale America is
respected again in the world and looked
to for leadership something that
happened to me a few years ago reflects
some of this it was back in 1981 and I
was attending my first big economic
summit which was held that year in
Canada the meeting place rotates among
the member countries the opening meeting
was a formal dinner for the Heads of
Government of the seven industrialized
nations
well I sat there like the new kid in
school and listened and it was all
Francois this and Helmut that
they dropped titles and spoke to know
one another on a first-name basis well
at one point I sort of leaned in and
said my name is Ron but in that same
year we began the actions we felt would
ignite an economic comeback cut taxes
and regulation started to cut spending
soon the recovery began two years later
another economic summit with pretty much
the same cast at the big opening meeting
we all got together and all of a sudden
just for a moment I saw that everyone
was just sitting there looking at me and
then one of them broke the silence tell
us about the American miracle he said
well back in 1980 when I was running for
president it was all so different some
pundits said our programs would result
in catastrophe our views on foreign
affairs would cause war our plans for
the economy would cause inflation to
soar and bring about economic collapse
I even remember one highly respected
economist saying back in 1982 that the
engines of economic growth have shut
down here and they're likely to stay
that way for years to come
well he and the other opinion leaders
were wrong the fact is what they called
radical was really right what they
called dangerous was just desperately
needed and in all of that time I want a
nickname the Great Communicator
but I never thought it was my style of
the words I used that made a difference
it was the content I wasn't a great
communicator but I communicated great
things and they didn't spring full-bloom
from my brow they came from the heart of
a great nation from our experience our
wisdom and our belief in the principles
that have guided us for two centuries
they called it the Reagan Revolution
well I'll accept that but for me it
always seemed more like the great
rediscovery a rediscovery of our values
and our common sense common sense told
us that when you put a big tax on
something
the people will produce less of it so we
cut the people's tax rates and the
people produced more than ever before
the economy bloomed like a plant that
had been cut back and could now grow
quicker and stronger our economic
program brought about the longest
peacetime expansion in our history
real family income up the poverty rate
down entrepreneurship booming and an
explosion and research and new
technology we're exporting more now than
ever because American industry became
more competitive and at the same time we
summon the national will to knock down
protectionist walls abroad instead of
erecting them at home
commonsense also told us that to
preserve the peace we'd have to become
strong again after years of weakness and
confusion so we rebuild our defenses in
this new year we toasted the new
peacefulness around the globe not only
of the superpowers actually begun to
reduce their stockpiles of nuclear
weapons and hope for even more progress
is bright but the regional conflicts
that rack the globe are also beginning
to cease the Persian Gulf is no longer a
war zone the Soviets are leaving
Afghanistan the Vietnamese are preparing
to pull out of Cambodia and an American
mediated Accord will soon send 50,000
Cuban troops home from Angola the lesson
of all this was of course that because
we're a great nation our challenges seem
complex it will always be this way but
as long as we remember our first
principles and believe in ourselves the
future will always be ours and something
else we learned once should begin a
great movement there's no telling where
it'll end we meant to change a nation
and instead we changed a world countries
across the globe are turning to free
markets and free speech and turning away
from the ideologies of the past for them
the great rediscovery of the 1980s has
been that low and behold
morale way of government is the
practical way of government democracy
the profoundly good is also the
profoundly productive when you've got to
the point where you can celebrate the
anniversaries of your 39th birthday you
can sit back sometimes review your life
and see it flowing before you for me
there was a fork in the river and it was
right in the middle of my life I never
meant to go into politics wasn't my
intention when I was young but I was
raised to believe you had to pay your
way for the blessings bestowed on you I
was happy with my career in the
entertainment world but I ultimately
went into politics because I wanted to
protect something precious ours was the
first revolution in the history of
mankind that truly reversed the course
of government and with three little
words we the people we the people tell
the government what to do it doesn't
tell us we the people are the driver
the government is the car and we decide
where it should go
and by what route and how fast almost
all the world's constitutions are
documents in which governments tell the
people what their privileges are our
Constitution is a document in which we
the people tell the government what it
is allowed to do we the people are free
this belief has been the underlying
basis for everything I've tried to do
these past eight years but back in the
1960s when I began it seemed to me that
we'd begun reversing the order of things
that through more and more rules and
regulations and confiscatory taxes the
government was taking more of our money
more of our options and more of our
freedom I went into politics in part to
put up my hand and say stop I was a
citizen politician and it seemed the
right thing for a citizen to do I think
we have stopped a lot of what needed
stopping and I hope we have once again
reminded people that man is not free
unless government is limited there's a
clear cause and effect here that
is as neat and predictable as a law of
physics as government expands liberty
contracts nothing is less free than pure
communism and yet we have the past few
years forged a satisfying new closeness
with the Soviet Union
I've been asked if this isn't a gamble
and my answer is no because we're basing
our actions not on words but deeds the
day tada this 1970s was based not on
actions but promises they'd promised to
treat their own people in the people of
the world better but the gulag was still
the gulag and the state was still
expansionist and they still waged proxy
wars in Africa Asia and Latin America
well this time so far it's different
President Gorbachev has brought about
some internal democratic reforms and
begun the withdrawal from Afghanistan he
has also freed prisoners whose names
I've given him every time we've met but
life has a way of reminding you were big
things through small incidents once
during the heady days of the Moscow
summit Nancy and I decided to break off
from the entourage one afternoon to
visit the shops on our bad Street that's
a little Street just off Moscow's main
shopping area even though our visit was
a surprise every Russian there
immediately recognized us and called out
our names and reached for our hands we
were just about swept away by the warmth
you could almost feel the possibilities
and all that joy but within seconds a
KGB detail pushed their way toward us
and began pushing and shoving the people
in the crowd it was an interesting
moment it reminded me that while a man
on the street in the Soviet Union
urines for peace the government is
communist and those who run it are
communists and that means we and they
view such issues as freedom and human
rights very differently we must keep up
our guard but we must also continue to
work together to lessen and eliminate
tension and mistrust my view is that
President Gorbachev is different from
previous Soviet
leaders I think he knows some of the
things wrong with his society and is
trying to fix them we wish him well and
we'll continue to work to make sure that
the Soviet Union that eventually emerges
from this process is a less threatening
one what it all boils down to is this I
want the new closeness to continue and
it will as long as we make it clear that
we will continue to act in a certain way
as long as they continue to act in a
helpful manner if and when they don't at
first pull your punches if they persist
pull the plug it's still trust but
verify it still play but cut the cards
it's still watch closely and don't be
afraid to see what you see
I've been asked if I have any regrets I
do the deficit is one I've been talking
a great deal about that lately but
tonight isn't for arguments and I'm
going to hold my tongue but an
observation I've had my share of
victories in the Congress but what few
people noticed is that I never won
anything
you didn't win for me they never saw my
troops they never saw Reagan's regiments
the American people you won every battle
with every call you made and letter you
wrote demanding action well action is
still needed if we're to finish the job
of Reagan's regiments will have to
become the bush brigades soon he'll be
the chief and he'll need you every bit
as much as I did finally there is a
great tradition of warnings in
presidential farewells and I've got one
that's been on my mind for some time but
hardly enough it starts with one of the
things I'm proudest of in the past eight
years the resurgence of national pride
that I called the new patriotism this
national feeling is good but it won't
count for much and it won't last
unless it's grounded in thoughtfulness
and knowledge and informed patriotism is
what we want and are we doing a good
enough job teaching our children what
America is and what
she represents in the long history of
the world those of us who are over 35 or
so years of age grew up in a different
America we were taught very directly
what it means to be an American and we
absorbed almost in the air a love of
country and an appreciation of its
institutions if you didn't get these
things from your family you got them
from the neighborhood from the father
down the street who fought in Korea or
the family who lost someone at Anzio or
you can get a sense of patriotism from
school and if all else failed you could
get a sense of patriotism from the
popular culture the movies celebrated
democratic values and implicitly
reinforced the idea that America was
special TV was like that too through the
mid 60s
but now we're about to enter the 90s and
some things have changed younger parents
aren't sure that an unambivalent
appreciation of America is the right
thing to teach modern children and as
for those who create the popular culture
well grounded patriotism is no longer
the style our spirit is back but we
haven't reinstitution alized it we've
got to do a better job of getting across
that America is freedom freedom of
speech freedom of religion freedom of
enterprise and freedom is special and
rare it's fragile
it needs production so we've got to
teach history based not on what's in
fashion but what's important why the
pilgrims came here who Jimmy Doolittle
was and what those 30 seconds over Tokyo
meant you know four years ago on the
40th anniversary of d-day I read a
letter from a young woman writing to her
late father who had fought on Omaha
Beach her name was Lisa sonata N and she
said we will always remember we will
never forget what the boys of Normandy
did well let's help her keep her word if
we forget what we did we won't know who
we are
I'm warning of an eradication of that of
the
American memory that could result
ultimately in an erosion of the American
spirit let's start with some basics more
attention to American history and a
greater emphasis on civic ritual and let
me offer lesson number one about America
all great change in America begins at
the dinner table so tomorrow night in
the kitchen
I hope the talking begins and children
if your parents haven't been teaching
you what it means to be an American let
him know and nail him on it that would
be a very American thing to do and
that's about all I have to say tonight
except for one thing the past few days
when I've been at that window upstairs
I've thought a bit of The Shining City
upon a hill the phrase comes from John
Winthrop who wrote it to describe the
America he imagined what he imagined was
important because he was an early
pilgrim and early freedom man he
journeyed here on what today we call a
little wooden boat and like the other
pilgrims he was looking for a home that
would be free I've spoken to the shining
city all my political life but I don't
know if I ever quite communicated what I
saw when I said it but in my mind it was
a tall proud City built on rocks
stronger than oceans windswept God
blessed and teeming with people of all
kinds living in harmony and peace a city
with pre ports that hummed with Commerce
and creativity and if there had to be
city walls the walls had doors and the
doors were open to anyone with the will
and the heart to get here that's how I
saw it and see it still and how stands
the city on this winter night more
prosperous more secure and happier than
it was eight years ago but more than
that after two hundred years two
centuries she still stands strong and
true on the granite ridge and her glow
is held steady no matter what storm
and she's still a beacon still a magnet
for all who must have freedom for all
the pilgrims from all the lost places
who are hurtling through the darkness
toward home we've done our part and as I
walk off into the city streets a final
word to the men and women of the Reagan
Revolution the men and women across
America who for eight years did the work
that brought America back my friends we
did it we weren't just marking time we
made a difference we made the city
stronger we made the city freer and we
left her in good hands all in all not
bad not bad at all
and so goodbye god bless you and God
bless the United States of America